J Comput Neurosci (2010) 29:459–473
DOI 10.1007/s10827-009-0203-1

Extracting functional components of neural dynamics
with Independent Component Analysis and inverse
Current Source Density

Szymon Ł ˛eski · Ewa Kublik · Daniel A. ´Swiejkowski ·
Andrzej Wróbel · Daniel K. Wójcik

Received: 4 August 2009 / Revised: 25 November 2009 / Accepted: 4 December 2009 / Published online: 22 December 2009
© Springer Science+Business Media, LLC 2009

Abstract Local ﬁeld potentials have good temporal res-
olution but are blurred due to the slow spatial decay
of the electric ﬁeld. For simultaneous recordings on
regular grids one can reconstruct efﬁciently the cur-
rent sources (CSD) using the inverse Current Source
Density method (iCSD). It is possible to decompose the
resultant spatiotemporal information about the current
dynamics into functional components using Indepen-
dent Component Analysis (ICA). We show on test data
modeling recordings of evoked potentials on a grid of
4 × 5 × 7 points that meaningful results are obtained
with spatial ICA decomposition of reconstructed CSD.
The components obtained through decomposition of
CSD are better deﬁned and allow easier physiological
interpretation than the results of similar analysis of cor-
responding evoked potentials in the thalamus. We show
that spatiotemporal ICA decompositions can perform
better for certain types of sources but it does not seem

Action Editor: T. Sejnowski

This work was partly ﬁnanced from the Polish Ministry
of Science and Higher Education grants
PBZ/MNiSW/07/2006/11 and 46/N-COST/2007/0.

Electronic supplementary material The online version
of this article (doi:10.1007/s10827-009-0203-1) contains
supplementary material, which is available to
authorized users.

S. Ł ˛eski (B) · E. Kublik · D. A. ´Swiejkowski ·
A. Wróbel · D. K. Wójcik
Department of Neurophysiology,
Nencki Institute of Experimental Biology,
3 Pasteur St., 02-093 Warsaw, Poland
e-mail: s.leski@nencki.gov.pl

D. K. Wójcik
e-mail: d.wojcik@nencki.gov.pl

to be the case for the experimental data studied. Having
found the appropriate approach to decomposing neural
dynamics into functional components we use the tech-
nique to study the somatosensory evoked potentials
recorded on a grid spanning a large part of the fore-
brain. We discuss two example components associated
with the ﬁrst waves of activation of the somatosensory
thalamus. We show that the proposed method brings up
new, more detailed information on the time and spatial
location of speciﬁc activity conveyed through various
parts of the somatosensory thalamus in the rat.

Keywords Local ﬁeld potentials (LFP) ·
Inverse Current Source Density (iCSD) ·
Independent Component Analysis (ICA) ·
Somatosensory evoked potentials (EP) ·
Thalamic processing

1 Introduction

One of the obstacles in understanding how the brain
works is that all of its parts work simultaneously. The
paradigm of evoked activity (averaging responses with
respect to the chosen marker) is helpful in extract-
ing dynamics relevant for a given stimulus. To locate
the anatomical structures processing a representation
of the stimulus and to pinpoint the order of their
activation one must be able to simultaneously probe
many regions of the brain. A number of techniques
assist the researcher in this enterprise, including PET,
MRI, voltage or calcium sensitive dyes. However, all of
them have limitations, either in terms of available time-
scales, interpretation of obtained results, or the extent
of the tissue that can be accessed simultaneously.

460

J Comput Neurosci (2010) 29:459–473

A convenient choice when it comes to temporal res-
olution is the local ﬁeld potential (LFP): low-frequency
part of the extracellular electric potential, which re-
ﬂects brain dynamics at the level of neural popula-
tions (Nunez and Srinivasan 2005). The extracellular
potential is generated by currents (mostly resulting
from synaptic inputs) crossing the cell membranes.
The coarse-grained distribution of trans-membrane
currents leaving or entering cells is called the current
source density (CSD).

In the simplest model, which assumes quasi-static
approximation of electrodynamic equations (Nunez
and Srinivasan 2005), the density of currents C is re-
lated to the extracellular voltage φ by the Poisson
equation:

∇(σ ∇φ) = −C,

(1)

where σ is the electrical conductivity tensor. Mathe-
matically, this is the same equation as the one which
describes the electric ﬁeld of static charge distribution.
The fundamental solution of this equation has the form
of φ ∼ 1
r . One consequence of the slow decay is that
even for localized CSD distributions, for dipole or
closed ﬁelds, which decay much faster, the resulting
potential φ is non-local. In other words, the electric
signal recorded in one place may reﬂect activity of a
distant neural population.1 This spatial blurring is the
ﬁrst challenge in analysis of LFP. If several time-aligned
recordings of LFP on a line, 2D or 3D grid, are avail-
able, one can try to address this problem by estimating
the underlying CSD from the measured voltages. This is
called the CSD method (Nicholson and Freeman 1975;
Freeman and Nicholson 1975; Mitzdorf 1985).

Another challenge follows from simultaneous activ-
ity of different populations which may contribute to
each of the recorded signals. This is the ‘cocktail party’
problem: how to hear what a single population is saying
if many populations are speaking at the same time.
Independent component analysis (ICA) (Comon 1994;
Bell and Sejnowski 1995) is a technique that proved
to be of use for this kind of blind source separation
problem in many ﬁelds. In neuroscience it was used,
among others, in the analysis of fMRI data (McKeown
et al. 1998; Stone et al. 2002), optical imaging recordings
(Schiessl et al. 2000; Reidl et al. 2007), in characteri-
zation of receptive ﬁelds (Saleem et al. 2008), and in
analysis of local ﬁeld potentials (Tanskanen et al. 2005).

Our application of ICA to volume CSD is similar in
spirit to fMRI and optical imaging analysis as in all of
these cases the tissue is probed regularly on ﬁne spatial
scales and one can assume the studied signals to be
generated by sources of well-deﬁned spatial location.

Neither of these techniques (CSD, ICA) alone seems
to be sufﬁcient for analysis of LFP recorded in a geo-
metrically and morphologically complex brain region,
such as the rat thalamus. For example, even if we knew
exactly the time-course of CSD, it could still happen
that sources and sinks occupying the same spatial lo-
calization represent activity of different populations
of cells, performing different functions. On the other
hand, independent components calculated from LFP
would ideally represent single functional populations,
but the localization of that populations would be not
so precise. While this may seem technical, better local-
ization of CSD versus LFP translates into substantially
better resolution of the method, as we discuss further.
In this paper we show that the combination of CSD
and ICA provides a powerful and stable method for ex-
traction of well-localized functional components from
multi-electrode recordings of LFP. We discuss several
variants of performing the decomposition and point out
the optimal approach for our data. Finally, we study
selected components obtained in analysis of data from
three dimensional (4 × 5 × 7 locations) mapping of the
local ﬁeld potentials in the rat forebrain during early
stages of tactile information processing.

The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2
we discuss the computational methods. Speciﬁcally, in
Subsection 2.1 we describe the inverse CSD method,
in Subsection 2.2 we present the spatiotemporal ICA
method we use, and in Subsection 2.3 we describe how
we use clustering to study stability of ICA decompo-
sition. We test different combinations of spatial and
temporal decompositions on volumetric test data in
Section 3 and show that depending on the structure
of sources different variants of ICA give best recon-
structions. In Section 4 we provide details about the
experimental procedure. The insights obtained in the
decomposition of test data are used in the analysis of
experimental data presented in Section 5 and discussed
in Section 6.

2 Computational methods

2.1 Inverse Current Source Density

1See Hunt et al. (2009, unpublished). Available at http://www.
neuroinf.pl/Members/danek/homepage/preprints/Article.2009-
10-22.4312

The simplest technique of CSD estimation which was
used traditionally was through the ﬁnite-difference ap-
proximation to Eq. (1), often smoothed for stability

J Comput Neurosci (2010) 29:459–473

461

(Freeman and Nicholson 1975). It is based on the re-
placement of the second derivative with appropriate
difference quotient. Let us focus on a one-dimensional
example and assume that CSD varies only along z axis
and is constant in perpendicular plane. Equation (1)
becomes then

σ

∂ 2φ
∂z2

= −C(z) .

(2)

Here we also assume that the medium is isotropic and
homogeneous so that σ is a constant scalar. Let us
consider signals from a laminar electrode with multiple
equidistant contacts positioned at zk = z0 + kh, where
h is the intercontact distance. The CSD is then ap-
proximated using the three-point formula for second
derivative:

C(zk) = −σ

φ(zk + h) − 2φ(zk) + φ(zk − h)
h2

.

(3)

This method has been applied extensively over the
years to electrophysiological signals from various parts
of the brain (Schroeder et al. 1992; Ylinen et al. 1995;
Shimono et al. 2000; Lakatos et al. 2005; Lipton et al.
2006; de Solages et al. 2008; Rajkai et al. 2008; Stoelzel
et al. 2009). One can also use other numerical approx-
∂ 2φ
imations of
∂z2 , for example using not only immedi-
ate neighbors but also next neighbors or use differ-
ent weights which may lead to better stability of the
estimates at the cost of spatial ﬁltering of the results
(see for example Freeman and Nicholson (1975); Tenke
et al. (1993)).

An advantage of the traditional CSD method is
its simplicity. Moreover, in simple one dimensional
geometry for recordings in laminar structures it often
gives meaningful results. However, this straightforward
approach has a number of drawbacks. For instance,
as shown in Pettersen et al. (2006), traditional CSD
method may introduce errors in estimating the CSD
when the sources vary considerably in the plane per-
pendicular to the electrode at the scale of a few inter-
contact distances. This is the case for the recordings
from the somatosensory (barrel) cortex, for example.
Also,
in traditional CSD it is hard to account for
conductivity jumps, e.g. at cortical surface. Another
drawback is that the three-point formula, Eq. (3), can
not be applied at the boundary. This means that we lose
boundary data. In one dimension we lose two points
out of, say, twenty, but for two- or three-dimensional
data the boundary may comprise most of the recording
points. For example, in two dimensional recordings on
an 8 by 8 grid there are 24 boundary points out of all 64,

and in the three-dimensional (4 × 5 × 7) data we study
here there are 110 points at the boundary out of 140
(more than 75%). Despite these facts even two dimen-
sional CSD estimates through discrete derivation were
studied for example in Novak and Wheeler (1989),
Shimono et al. (2000) and Lin et al. (2002). For one
dimensional cortical recordings, to overcome the prob-
lem of the boundaries, Vaknin et al. (1988) proposed
to add virtual recording points at both ends of the line
of contacts and to assume that φ at these points is the
same as at the nearest end. This procedure allows us to
estimate the CSD at the ends, but the assumption that
voltage does not vary outside the recording electrode is
not always right.

Recently another approach to CSD estimation called
inverse Current Source Density method was proposed
by Pettersen et al. (2006) for one dimensional record-
ings and generalized to three-dimensional recordings
by Ł ˛eski et al. (2007). Here, unlike the traditional CSD,
one does not try to estimate C directly from Eq. (1).
Instead, one constructs a class of CSD distributions
parameterized with as many parameters as the number
of recorded signals. Then one has to establish a one-
to-one relation F between measured voltages φ and
the parameters of the CSD distribution. For a speciﬁc
example assume N recording points on one-, two- or
three-dimensional Cartesian grid. Consider a family
of CSD distributions parameterized by N numbers,
(x, y, z, t). By this we mean that knowing the
Ic1,...,cN
values of the N parameters we can assign a value of
CSD to each spatial position. Then the values of the
potential, φ, on the grid can be obtained by solving
Eq. (1), which yields the relation F. A direct solution
to the Poisson equation leads to the formula

φc1,...,cN
(cid:2)

=

(x, y, z, t)

(cid:3)

Ic1,...,cN
(cid:5)(cid:3)

x(cid:4), y(cid:4), z(cid:4), t
(cid:3)
(cid:4)
2 +

4π σ

x − x(cid:4)

y − y(cid:4)

2 +

z − z(cid:4)

(cid:4)

dx(cid:4) dy(cid:4) dz(cid:4)

(cid:4)

(cid:3)

.

(cid:4)

2

Therefore, the N measured voltages

φn(t) = φc1,...,cN

(cid:3)

(cid:4)

xn, yn, zn, t

are functions of the N CSD parameters

(cid:3)

(cid:4)
φ1(t), . . . , φN(t)

T = F

(cid:3)
c1, . . . , cN

(cid:4)

(t)

(4)

If the family and the parameterization are chosen ap-
propriately, one can invert F and from the N mea-
sured potentials get the N parameters of CSD. One
particularly useful parameterization which we are using

462

J Comput Neurosci (2010) 29:459–473

here, is to use CSD values on the measurement grid
as the N parameters cn and obtain the CSD within the
(x0, y0, z0, t) via interpolation (for example
grid Ic1,...,cN
nearest neighbor, linear or with splines). Then one can
reduce Eq. (4) to an invertible linear relation between
the recorded potentials and the CSD values at the grid.
One can also consider other CSD distributions and
parameterizations. For example, Pettersen et al. (2006)
showed that the traditional one-dimensional CSD is
equivalent to inverse CSD if we assume that the CSD
is localized on inﬁnitely thin, inﬁnite planes located
at z = zi.

Assuming that all the sources are located within the
electrodes grid may lead to noticeable reconstruction
errors close to the boundary when there are active
sources located outside the probed region (Ł ˛eski et al.
2007). This is because the inverse CSD method tries to
imitate the inﬂuence of these sources by adjusting the
distribution within the grid. A way to overcome this
difﬁculty is to consider a family of CSD distributions
extending one layer beyond the original grid. One can
set the CSD values at the additional nodes to zero
or duplicate the value from the nearest node of the
original grid. We denote these two approaches by B and
D boundary conditions, in line with notation of (Ł ˛eski
et al. 2007). Note that new CSD family on the extended
grid is still parameterized with N parameters. In this
paper we use spline interpolation between the nodes
and the D boundary conditions.

2.2 Independent Component Analysis

We follow the spatiotemporal ICA scheme as de-
scribed in detail by Stone and Porrill (1999) and Stone
et al. (2002). The data we aim to analyze are m =
4 × 5 × 7 = 140 signals f1(t), . . . , fm(t), with 1 ≤ t ≤ n.
We can arrange the data in an m × n matrix, X =
( f1, . . . , fm)T , so that the rows of X are our signals.
Equivalently we can view our data as a sequence of
n snapshots X = (s1, . . . , sn).

First we use principal component analysis to reduce
dimensionality of the problem. That is, we approximate
our data matrix X with (cid:6)X = U V T , where U is an m × k
matrix of k spatial components (‘coefﬁcients’ in PCA),
and V is an n × k matrix of temporal components
(principal component ‘scores’). The choice of k is an
important issue. Especially taking k too small is to
be avoided, as that may result in losing information
contained in the signal. Also, for k not large enough one
may end up with components which could be further
separated for larger k. On the other hand, taking k too

large may result in unnecessarily large data sets, but
is less dangerous than the opposite. To choose k for
the experimental data we performed the analysis for
3 ≤ k ≤ 32. Using clustering (Section 2.3) we found that
the number of components we could extract saturates
around k = 20 (see Figs. 1 and 2 in the Supplementary
material). Finally, we took k = 24 for analysis of exper-
imental data. For model data (Section 3) we also took
k = 24, despite the fact that the true dimensionality of
the data was lower (between 5 and 8). In such cases
we get several large components corresponding to the
original ones, and several components which are close
to zero. This backs the claim that choosing too large k
is safer than choosing k too small.

The idea behind spatiotemporal ICA is to take into
account information about independence carried by the
temporal signals and the spatial distributions and de-
compose (cid:6)X = ST T into maximally independent spatial
and temporal components S and T. This decomposition
is found by maximization of a linear combination of
entropies obtained separately for spatial, HS, and tem-
poral, HT , probability distribution functions:

hST = α HS + (1 − α)HT .

(5)

Parameter α ∈ [0, 1] quantiﬁes how much weight we
attribute to the temporal and spatial independence.
α = 0 is purely temporal decomposition, when one as-
sumes independent temporal sources with dual spatial
distributions unconstrained. α = 1 is purely spatial de-
composition, when one assumes independent sources
localized in space and dual unconstrained temporal
signals. Intermediate α take into account possible in-
dependence of both parts. In the article we use α = 0.5
or α = 0.8 although we tested a wider range of values.
Both the temporal and spatial ICA decompose the
original signals into pairs of temporal signals and as-
sociated spatial proﬁles. The difference is in the as-
sumptions underlying the decomposition. The temporal
ICA tries to ﬁnd signals which are independent over
time, while the spatial ICA looks for signals which
are independent over space. Physiologically, this means
that the temporal ICA assumes independent processes
in the brain taking place simultaneously, while spatial
ICA assumes that there exist independent modules,
or spatially organized nuclei, which perform distinct
functions and are generators of independent signals.
One should expect that the most reasonable assump-
tions will depend on the experimental situation. For
example, for analysis of ongoing EEG signal the tem-
poral ICA may work better, as the resulting signals are
produced by many independent generators performing

J Comput Neurosci (2010) 29:459–473

463

different functions simultaneously. On the other hand,
the spatial ICA may be better suited for the analysis
of averaged stimulus-evoked potentials, as in such case
the signals are related to a single brain computation,
which is performed by a network with ﬁxed anatomical
connections.

The details of the algorithm are presented in Stone
and Porrill (1999) and Stone et al. (2002). We used
the Matlab code2 by J.V. Stone and J. Porrill. We
required that the spatial independent components have
high kurtosis (model probability density function x (cid:7)→
1 − tanh2 x), and that the temporal components have
low kurtosis (model pdf x (cid:7)→ e−x4 ). This requirement is
satisﬁed for example by localized spatial components
and oscillatory time courses. Any other combination of
kurtosis assumptions led to physiologically meaningless
components.

2.3 Clustering of independent components

All variants of ICA methods rely on minimization of
a certain goal function. In our case this goal function,
Eq. (5), is negative of entropy of estimated compo-
nents (Bell and Sejnowski 1995; Stone et al. 2002). One
problem that may arise here is that the minimization
algorithm typically ﬁnds only a local minimum of the
goal function. A priori there is no guarantee that this
local minimum corresponds to a valid solution of blind
source separation problem, although it may be the case.
One way to make sure that we obtain correct solutions
is to repeat the ICA algorithm several times, using for
example different starting points for minimization, and
to see if the components are stably extracted (Himberg
et al. 2004).

For each rat we repeated the ICA procedure 30
times with random initial mixing matrix. Every time we
looked for 24 components, which produced the total
of 720 components. We clustered these components
using hierarchical agglomerative clustering (group av-
erage linkage), as in Himberg et al. (2004). We used
the hcluster.m Matlab script available as a part
of Icasso software package.3 As the dissimilarity ma-
trix we used a matrix of (squared) L2 distances be-
tween components. Speciﬁcally, for two components
f j(t), associated with spatial proﬁles (values at
fi(t),

2STICA software available at http://jim-stone.staff.shef.ac.uk/
3The package is available at http://www.cis.hut.ﬁ/jhimberg/icasso/

140 measurement points) si(x, y, z), s j(x, y, z), we took
D(i, j ) as dissimilarity, where
D(i, j ) = DT (i, j )
(cid:9)DT (i, j )(cid:10)i, j
(cid:7)
(cid:8)

+ DS(i, j )
(cid:9)DS(i, j )(cid:10)i, j
(cid:8)
(cid:4)
fi(t)− f j(t)

(cid:4)
fi(t)+ f j(t)

DT (i, j ) = min

2 ,

(cid:9)

(cid:3)

(cid:3)

,

,

2

DS(i, j ) = min

t

(cid:3)

(cid:4)
si(x, y, z) − s j(x, y, z)

2 ,

⎞

(cid:3)

(cid:4)
si(x, y, z) + s j(x, y, z)

2

⎠ .

t

(cid:8)

⎛

⎝

x,y,z

(cid:8)

x,y,z

We take the minimum over measures using fi(t) − f j(t)
and fi(t) + f j(t), analogously for s(x, y, z), to avoid
spurious dissimilarities which would occur when signs
are differently distributed between fi(t) and si(t) for
two runs of ICA.

We also used clustering to choose the number of
extracted components k. We pooled all 525 compo-
nents obtained for 3 ≤ k ≤ 32 (one run for each k) and
applied the clustering procedure described above. We
divided the data into 32 clusters and counted how many
clusters are populated by components obtained for
selected k in the studied range. For our experimental
data this number saturates slightly above k = 20, see
the Supplementary material available online.

3 Analysis of test data

To test the proposed ICA / iCSD method we used
model data of the same form as the experimental data
studied in the next section. Thus we generated 140 LFP
signals from a number (between M = 5 to M = 8) of
spatially localized sources with time-courses gi(t) and
spatial proﬁles ci(x, y, z). Speciﬁcally, we assumed the
current-source density of the form

C(x, y, z, t) =

M(cid:8)

i=1

ci(x, y, z)gi(t).

(6)

We used three types of the time courses gi(t): 1) oscilla-
tory signals (Gaussian white noise low-pass ﬁltered be-
low 300 Hz), 2) simulated “evoked potentials”—these
signals consisted of two step functions of opposite sign
ﬁltered below 300 Hz, 3) experimental evoked poten-
tials chosen from the recordings described in Section 4.
As the spatial components we took CSD distributions
for which the inverse CSD method gives exact results.

464

J Comput Neurosci (2010) 29:459–473

The reason for choosing such sources was to focus on
comparing different variants of ICA. The reconstruc-
tion error of the iCSD method itself has already been
studied in Ł ˛eski et al. (2007) and Wójcik and Ł ˛eski
(2009). The sources were constructed as follows: on a
grid of 4 × 5 × 7 nodes we set non-zero CSD values
at a small number of nodes. These values were then
interpolated using splines in the same way as used for
construction of F (see Section 2.1). Again, we used
several kinds of spatial components: a) two non-zero
nodes, for which we took the same absolute value of
CSD and opposite signs (a dipole); b) as in a), but
with the same signs; c) two non-zero nodes with the
CSD values of opposite signs and non-equal amplitude;
d) a non-zero value Vcentral at one node surrounded by
non-zero values in 6 neighboring nodes (the number of
neighboring nodes was smaller if the central node was
located at the boundary), the values at the neighboring
nodes were equal to −Vcentral/6; e) single non-zero CSD
node. Due to spline interpolation every distribution was
non-zero in some region surrounding initially set CSD
nodes. These choices of spatial and temporal proﬁles
were motivated by the structures observed in the analy-
sis of experimental data. All components from two of
the model datasets are presented in Supplementary
material available online.

For these different sets of sources and generated
potentials we performed the inverse CSD analysis, fol-
lowed by spatial, temporal, and spatiotemporal ICA
decomposition (Section 2.2) with different values of α.
This framework allowed us to compare the components
obtained for different choices of α with the generating
sources known exactly. It was shown in Stone and
Porrill (1999) on test data modeling synthetic fMRI im-
ages that the best decomposition of signal was obtained
when both spatial and temporal independence of the
data were taken into account (for spatiotemporal ICA
with α = 0.5). We expected the same to be true in case
of three-dimensional LFP data. However, in case of our
simulated signals we found that the values of α which
give good results for some combinations of temporal
and spatial components do not necessarily lead to valid
reconstructions for different classes of components.
One general observation was that purely temporal de-
compositions usually led to meaningless components.
Otherwise, depending on test case, either spatial or
spatiotemporal decompositions were performing bet-
ter. For every test case at least one approach allowed
to recover the original sources with high precision.

Here is the summary of our observations:

1. For spatial components of type a) the best choice
is the spatiotemporal ICA (for example α = 0.5

although the results were robust against changes
of α), which allows for faithful extraction of the
original components. Spatial ICA (α = 1) extracted
some components faithfully, but other components
were not unmixed properly. For example, two of
the original components were extracted as three
reconstructed components, with some non-trivial
cancellations occurring.

2. For type b) and c) both spatial (α = 1) and spa-
tiotemporal (α = 0.5) ICA methods recover the
original components.

3. For d) spatial components the spatial ICA works
better than the spatiotemporal variant, which tends
to produce several components with overlapping
spatial parts and similar time-courses; however, the
spatial ICA sometimes puts some part of the sur-
rounding current sources into a different compo-
nent than the central source.

4. For e) spatial components (single non-zero CSD
node) and oscillating signals (type 1) the spatial
ICA is again a better choice.

To illustrate these effects Fig. 1 shows example com-
ponents obtained in spatiotemporal and spatial ICA
decompositions for test sources of the form d), which
corresponds to the closed ﬁeld we observe in the ex-
perimental data, with part of the temporal signals given
by the ﬁltered step potentials, 2), and another part
being the experimental EPs, 3). The dataset was a
linear combination of eight sources of such form with
different spatial placement. Figure 1(A) and (B) show
two of the original model components. The spatial ICA
leads to well separated components, Fig. 1(C) and (D).
For spatiotemporal decomposition these two compo-
nents become mixed, Fig. 1(E) and (F). Figure 1(G)
and (H) show their sum at two different time points.
This dataset, processed using several variants of the

(cid:2)

Fig. 1 Tests of spatial (α = 1) and spatiotemporal (α = 0.5) ICA
on model data described in Section 3, point 3. Each panel shows
one (A–F) or two (G, H) components in 3D. Five images in every
panel are parallel, consecutive slices through the volume spanned
by the 4 × 5 × 7 grid and show the spatial distribution of the
current source density. Below each planar representation of the
spatial CSD distribution we plot the time course of the compo-
nents, fi(t), the vertical line marks the time for which the spatial
distribution is drawn. (A, B) two of the components present in
model data. Spatial ICA recovers these components faithfully
(C, D). The spatiotemporal ICA generates two components
(E, F), overlapping in space. The sum of these two components at
t = 9ms, (G), is similar to the original component (A), while the
same sum at t = −0.2ms yields the component (B). This means
that in this case the spatiotemporal ICA produces mixtures of
original components

J Comput Neurosci (2010) 29:459–473

465

466

J Comput Neurosci (2010) 29:459–473

dynamics observed in the experiment (see Section 4,
especially Figs. 5 and 6). It was also inspired by the
simultaneous divergent signal propagation commonly
taking place in the neural system.

One issue that should be addressed is why decom-
pose iCSD reconstructions instead of raw potentials.
When we perform the two procedures, ICA decompo-
sition and iCSD reconstruction, in principle they can
be done in either order. In practice, however, it turns
out that ICA decomposition of potentials followed by
reconstruction of the underlying CSD did not produce
good results. This is caused by the long range of electric
potential which smears the current sources in the LFP
picture. Therefore, the same source in the CSD picture
will be much more localized than its potential. This
leads to higher kurtosis for the distribution of CSD val-
ues. As the algorithm we used is unmixing sources look-
ing for high kurtosis in the spatial domain, it is a major
issue. Figure 2 shows components obtained through
spatial ICA on LFP followed by iCSD (Fig. 2(C))
with components obtained by ICA performed on iCSD
reconstructed signals (Fig. 2(B)) corresponding to a
speciﬁc original source in the signal (Fig. 2(A)). The
kurtosis of the distribution of the CSD values of the
original source (Fig. 2(A)) was 113, which was almost
twice the kurtosis of the distribution of LFP values for
the same source (60). Clearly, the ICA on LFP leads to
very poor decomposition. Curiously, the time course of
the source was correctly recovered by both approaches.

4 Animal experiments and data

We used the ICA / iCSD method described above
to understand the dynamics of complex spatiotempo-
ral activation pattern evoked in the rat’s thalamus
by somatosensory stimulation. The local ﬁeld poten-
tial (LFP) responses to vibrissal displacement were
recorded from deep forebrain structures of the anaes-
thetized (urethane; 1.5 g/kg b.w.) adult male Wistar
rats (N = 7). Local anesthetic (EMLA 5% cream)
was applied into external auditory meatus and animals
placed in a stereotaxic apparatus. Skin on the head
was injected with 0.5% lidocaine prior to incision. The
body temperature was kept at 37◦C by a thermostatic
blanket, liquid requirements were fulﬁlled by subcuta-
neous injections of 0.9% NaCl (2 ml every 2 h). The
depth of anesthesia was monitored by observation of
presence of corneal reﬂexes and whisker twitching and
adjusted with supplementary doses of urethane (10% of
the initial dose). All experimental procedures followed
the 86/609/EEC Directive and were accepted by the 1st
Warsaw Local Ethics Committee.

Fig. 2 Comparison of spatial components obtained with ICA
applied to either LFP signals or reconstructed CSD. (A) Original
(model) spatial component. (B) Spatial component recovered
using spatial ICA on CSD. (C) Spatial component recovered us-
ing spatial ICA on LFP (decomposition followed by iCSD). (D)
Time-course of the original component is faithfully recovered
with both methods

procedure, is available online together with a suitable
Matlab viewer.4

Clearly, the choice of model data may favor one
method over the other, therefore these results, to some
extent, are a consequence of the assumed structure of
sources. Speciﬁcally, while the spatial distributions of
two components could overlap, there was usually sub-
stantial difference between any pair. On the other hand,
we considered sources with substantially correlated
time courses. Our intention was to model similar acti-
vation of these spatially separated sources following the

4http://www.neuroinf.pl/Members/szleski/iCSD_data/ICviewer

J Comput Neurosci (2010) 29:459–473

467

To access the deep forebrain structures most of the
right parietal bone was removed and the resulting open-
ing was covered with agar dissolved in saline. A set
of 2–5 stainless steel micro-electrodes (FHC, Bowdoin,
USA; impedance of 1–1.5 M(cid:7) at 1 kHz) was mounted
in parallel on the manipulator holder with 0.7 mm
horizontal spacing between the tips. Electrodes were
lowered vertically through the opening and stopped
each 0.7 mm at seven depths in the brain tissue, starting
at 3.4 mm from the cortical surface (zero being set at
the most medial-anterior position; cross in Fig. 3(B)).
At each stop the group of left whiskers (attached to
piezoelectric stimulator) was deﬂected by 100μm, 60
times (signals were then averaged to obtain the evoked
potentials (EPs) from a speciﬁc point). After comple-

tion of one penetration the electrodes were moved to
the other recording positions on the 4 by 5 surface grid
(Fig. 3(B)). Thus, a 3D Cartesian grid of 140 (4 × 5 × 7)
recording points comprising a slab of forebrain tissue
with portions of the thalamus, pretectum, hippocam-
pus, and cerebral white matter was completed. The
length of the interelectrode distance was based on the
average size of the studied thalamic nuclei (e.g. the pos-
terior nucleus, Po, 1.4 × 1 × 2 mm), and the expected
large-scale activation evoked by the strong multi-
whisker input.

The LFPs were recorded monopolarly (with Ag-
AgCl reference electrode under the skin on the neck),
ampliﬁed (1000 times) and ﬁltered (0.1–5 kHz). Epochs
(of about 1.4 s) containing EPs were digitized on-line

Fig. 3 Potentials recorded in Rat 1 in one of the coronal planes.
(A) Evoked potentials recorded at positions marked by full cir-
cles in the coronal plane shown in (B); (B) Drawing of structures
and electrode tracks in one of the investigated coronal planes.
Ellipses on the top outline the approximate surface positions
of the insertions of the electrode grid (ﬁlled ellipses correspond to
the drawn plane, crossed ellipse marks the surface position where
the stereotaxic manipulator was set to zero; the coordinates
of the surface grid are 2.1, 2.8, 3.5 and 4.2 mm to the right
from midline, 1.9, 2.6, 3.3, 4.0 and 4.7 mm posterior to Bregma).

Light gray lines mark electrodes traces and light gray circles
indicate recording positions at seven depths at the deep fore-
brain. The notation of the recording positions and respective EPs
corresponds to X_Y_Z coordinates, where X deciphers lateral
position, Y anterior-posterior position and Z codes the recording
depth. Accordingly, the coronal plane shown in B corresponds to
Y = 3 and the biggest potential can be traced at location 2_3_7.
For the names of the structures see section Abbreviations at the
end of the article

468

J Comput Neurosci (2010) 29:459–473

(10 kHz) with 1401plus interface and Spike-2 software
(CED, Cambridge, England). All stored data were ex-
amined for integrity and epochs with artifacts were ex-
cluded from further analysis. To obtain clear LFP, not
contaminated by multi-unitary activity, the recorded
signal was low-pass ﬁltered below 300Hz (a linear-
phase FIR digital ﬁlter of order 100 with Kaiser win-
dow, β = 5).

After completion of the experiment the electrolytic
lesions were made in corner positions of the record-
ing grid; rats received overdose of pentobarbital
(150 mg/kg b.w.) and were perfused transcardialy with
saline followed by 10% formalin. Removed brains were
stored in ﬁxative, then cryoprotected in sucrose solu-
tions, sectioned on freezing microtome (50μm slices)
and stained with Cresyl Violet. We used the layer-
ing option of a graphic program (Gimp 2.6) to set
photographs of brain slices against the atlas planes
(Paxinos and Watson 1996, 2007) and to draw outlines
of structures, electrodes tracks and lesions (Fig. 3(B)).
The intermediate depth recording positions were esti-
mated at each 1/6th of inter-lesion distances along the
electrodes tracks. Final drawings for presenting results
were adjusted (spread, squeezed, skewed etc.) to ﬁt the
perfectly spaced grid used for plotting CSD and ICA
components.

To address speciﬁc recording positions we use
X_Y_Z coordinates where X is the number of lat-
eral position starting from midline; Y—the number of
anterior-posterior position (counting from the front)
and Z—the number of recording depth (starting from
the top, see Fig. 3).

5 Results

The goal of this work was to ﬁnd physiologically mean-
ingful components of the neural activity. We expected
that in the course of neural activation started with
deﬂection of vibrissae an increasing number of nu-
clei and cell populations would be activated according
to the structure of the network. As the populations
are well-localized in space we would expect that spa-
tial ICA should perform well. We assume that also
the time courses of activation of most structures are
(statistically) independent to a large extent as most of
them have several inputs and outputs which may play
different roles at different times. However, some of the
common inputs could dominate resulting in temporal
correlation of activity in certain structures. It is hard to
tell a priori which choice of α would lead to best results
in the analysis of our experimental data. Guided by our

tests from Section 3 we expected that spatiotemporal or
spatial ICA decompositions would be optimal.

To avoid bias, however, we studied ICA spatiotem-
poral decompositions of the experimental data using
several values of α in Eq. (5), from α = 0 (purely
temporal) to α = 1 (purely spatial decomposition). The
results for all animals indicated inadequacy of temporal
decompositions. Figure 4(A) shows a typical compo-
nent obtained through the temporal ICA. The spatial
proﬁle lacks well-deﬁned structure and occupies a sub-
stantial region in space, and the temporal compo-
nent is strongly oscillatory including the time before
stimulation. On the other hand, components obtained

Fig. 4 Examples of components typically obtained with temporal
and spatial ICA (Rat 1). (A) Temporal ICA, α = 0. Note that
the time-course of the activation is not related to the stimulation
(0 ms). It is also hard to interpret the observed spatial pat-
tern in physiological terms. (B) Spatial ICA, α = 1. The spatial
component has a clear, physiologically meaningful organization
(localized activity in VPM). Before stimulation this component is
not active. Two waves of activation (4–6 ms and 20–30 ms) may
be interpreted as incoming sensory activation and the activation
of cortico-thalamic feedback, respectively. The spatial proﬁles
are shown at times of maximum of the temporal counterparts,
vertical lines in the lower panels of (A), (B)

J Comput Neurosci (2010) 29:459–473

469

for α = 1 (spatial ICA) were more localized in space
interpretation
and allowed for sound physiological
(Fig. 4(B)). Also the time courses of the strongest
components were well-behaved with small or absent
ﬂuctuations for times up to 2-3ms after the onset of
simulation, followed by nontrivial behavior, often cor-
relating well with parts of LFPs recorded near the
putative center of the source. The failure of temporal
ICA in view of the results of the spatial decomposition
can be understood as a consequence of the temporal
correlation of the activity of different sources.

As another sanity test of the procedure used we
studied its stability with respect to the starting point
of the algorithm. As described in Section 2.3 we ran
the algorithm 30 times with random initial conditions
and then performed clustering on all 720 (24 × 30)
components, dividing them into 24 clusters. For α = 1
the procedure gave 12 clusters of size 30 (containing
only one component from each run), with 5 subsequent
clusters containing 31 or 32 components each (i.e. one
or two mistakes). This means that 17 components were
estimated reliably. On the other hand, for α = 0.5 we
obtained only one cluster of size 30 and another one
of size 28, several smaller clusters (between 1 and 23
components) and one huge cluster comprising 457 com-
ponents from all runs. Based on the visual inspection
of components obtained for different α, on the cluster-
ing analysis, and on the results from tests of different
variants of ICA on several sets of model LFPs, we
chose to use the spatial ICA (α = 1) to process the
experimental data.

Observing the recorded potentials one can see stim-
ulus evoked waves at almost each of 140 positions
(Fig. 3). This activity pattern encompassed several dis-
tinct regions of the thalamus due to massive divergence
of the ascending ﬁbers and heterogeneous inputs from
various vibrissal afferents (for a review, see Waite
(2004)) and the timing order of their activation might
shape speciﬁcity of information which is passed on to
the cortex. Figure 3(A) shows EPs recorded at one
coronal plane (−3.7 mm from Bregma) in Rat 1. There
is only one early EP that clearly stands out in this
view suggesting the short latency activation (signal
from the electrode just below the zona incerta, position
2_3_7). Other locations share many similar deﬂections
of recorded traces which may partially result from elec-
trotonic spread of ﬁeld potentials.

To decompose the complex spatiotemporal activa-
tion pattern of voltage responses evoked in the rat’s
thalamus by sensory stimulation we applied the ICA/
iCSD method. Figure 5 exempliﬁes two components
(out of 24) which constituted the current sinks with
the shortest latencies evoked speciﬁcally in the ﬁrst

Fig. 5 Experimental data from Rat 7. Two independent compo-
nents (A, B) with current sinks in somatosensory thalamus. The
ﬁrst component (A) is located at the border of VPM and Po, the
second, stronger component (B) is located in more lateral part of
the dorsal VPM. The locations match the expected positions of
‘heads’ and ‘cores’ of barreloids, see text

order somatosensory thalamic nucleus, i.e. the ventral
postero-medial nucleus (VPM) in Rat 7. The spot
of activation differentiated by the ﬁrst component in
Fig. 5(A) was located at the border of VPM and the
posterior thalamic nucleus (Po) and reached its maxi-
mum at 3.6 ms after deﬂection of a bunch of contralat-
eral whiskers. With a little delay, the second, stronger,
component (Fig. 5(B)) activated more lateral part of
the dorsal VPM and reached its maximum at 4.7 ms
after stimulation, i.e. about 1 ms later than the ﬁrst
one. The detailed analysis conﬁrmed that the locations
of the two sinks overlapped the expected positions of
so called ‘heads’ (ﬁrst component) and ‘cores’ (second
component) of barreloids, i.e. the neuronal groupings
representing the stimulated bundle of large vibrissae
(Pierret et al. 2000; Urbain and Deschênes 2007).

Analogous components recorded in Rat 1 are pre-
sented in Fig. 6. The faster, weaker component peaks

470

J Comput Neurosci (2010) 29:459–473

Fig. 6 Experimental data from Rat 1. (A, C) Full CSD recon-
struction and (B, D) sum of the CSD contained in the ‘head’
and ‘core’ components extracted using spatial ICA. (E) The time
course of the two extracted components, black line represents the

component placed at the border of VPM and Po, gray line—at
VPM core). The time after stimulation is 3.6 ms in (A, B), and
5.2 ms in (C, D), marked with vertical lines on the temporal plot,
(E). See text for details

at 4.0 ms after stimulation (black trace in Fig. 6(E));
the second component dominates about 1ms later (gray
trace in Fig. 6(E)). To show the different dynamics of
the two components we plot their sum in Fig. 6(B) and
(D). As time goes on, the ﬁrst component originally
dominates the other (shown at the latency of 3.6 ms
at Fig. 6(B)), then the second component takes over
(shown at the peak of the second component, latency
of 5.2 ms, Fig. 6(D)). Figure 6(A) and (C) contrast the
complete pattern of tissue activation 3.6 and 5.2 ms
after the onset of stimulus with the sum of the currents

given by the two components under discussion shown
in Fig. 6(B) and (D).

The sequence of described activation could be traced
in data from all rats (Table 1) but the position of the
ﬁrst component was accurately placed at the VPM/Po
border only in ﬁve animals due to the matched locations
of recording electrodes (as in shown examples of Rat
1 and 7). In another rat (Rat 4) the ﬁrst component
was weaker and in Rat 6 it was included into less
weighted, mixed components obtained in the analysis.
The experimental dataset analyzed above (Rat 1), is
available together with a Matlab viewer.5

Table 1 Peak latencies for ’core’ and ’head’ components in all
rats

6 Summary and discussion

‘heads’

‘cores’

1
2
3
4
5
6
7

4.0
4.1
4.6
5.1
4.2
–
3.6

5.2
5.0
5.8
5.9
5.1
4.8 (small amplitude)
4.7

In this paper we have shown that the combination of
ICA following iCSD reconstruction from EP record-
ings on a regular grid is a powerful technique for extrac-
tion of functional components of neural dynamics. The

5http://www.neuroinf.pl/Members/szleski/iCSD_data/ICviewer

J Comput Neurosci (2010) 29:459–473

471

method described here brought up new, more detailed
information on the latency and spatial location of spe-
ciﬁc activity conveyed through various parts of the rat
somatosensory thalamus. This was possible due to two
characteristics of electrophysiological data utilized by
the method. First, averaging of EPs makes it possible
to extract accurate anatomical position and time de-
pendence (dynamics) of small current sources accom-
panying the different volleys of conveyed spike activity.
Second, utilizing both the physiological and anatomical
results from the same animal allows for extraction of
highly speciﬁc, individual relationships between the two
data sets.

We have tested different variants of spatiotemporal
ICA applied to CSD and LFP, from purely temporal to
purely spatial decompositions. For the cases tested the
temporal ICA usually gave meaningless results. This is
probably the result of observed temporal correlation
between sets of sources receiving common input. For
some sources spatiotemporal ICA worked best, how-
ever, for our experimental data spatial ICA seems to
extract the functional components most efﬁciently. In
principle one could perform ICA decomposition and
CSD reconstruction in either order. However, as the
ICA procedure is nonlinear the results obtained are
very different. Indeed, as we showed, it turns out that
ICA of LFP results in very poor decomposition. This is
an effect of the long range of electric potential which
smears current sources in the LFP picture. As a result,
the distribution of CSD values of a source will have a
higher kurtosis than the distribution of values of LFP
generated by this source. The ICA algorithm we used
assumes high kurtosis of the distributions of spatial
proﬁles, so the better localization of reconstructed cur-
rent sources versus potentials is an advantage. This is
why we chose to use iCSD ﬁrst, and then spatial ICA,
to decompose the neural dynamics obtained from ex-
tracellular multielectrode recordings into meaningful,
functional components .

Application of any ICA algorithm to data always
leads to some “independent” components in the con-
text of the given framework. It is non-trivial to verify
that they are the meaningful, or functional as we
say, components one requires. Our conviction that the
components obtained through ICA on iCSD in our
experiments are indeed meaningful comes from the
positive results of extensive testing on different types
of data and from the structure of the spatial proﬁles
and time courses of the obtained components which
allow for meaningful physiological interpretation. We
believe that further conﬁrmation can be obtained by re-
alistic modeling of the system generating the measured
signals. Having control over different nuclei and their

dynamics we will be able to verify if indeed the compo-
nents obtained through our procedure are generated in
different functional structures.

The physiological validity of the proposed method
is supported by several features of the resulting com-
ponents. First, the components are clearly separated
(cf. Figs. 5 and 6), with neither of the components calcu-
lated for a given animal having similar location in space
and time simultaneously. Second, most of the activated
sources are tightly anchored to the somatosensory path-
way structures known from the literature as relaying
the vibrissal input (Waite 2004).6 Speciﬁcally, among
few strongest components we typically found the ones
with short latencies located in the ﬁrst order thala-
mic nucleus VPM and zona incerta, structures known
to receive strong and fast excitatory vibrissal input
(Diamond et al. 1992; Nicolelis et al. 1992).

The results presented in Figs. 5 and 6 based on the
proposed ICA/iCSD method deliver the ﬁrst functional
conﬁrmation of the separation between two pathways
conveying the somatosensory information via the prin-
cipal trigeminal nucleus and that part of VPM, which
contains the cytochrome oxidase-rich barreloids (Land
et al. 1995; Veinante and Deschênes 1999; Urbain and
Deschênes 2007). The anatomical locations of both
pathways were recently well established. The stratum of
VPM at its dorsomedial margin (‘heads’ of barreloids)
contains cells with obligatorily multi-whisker input
whereas neurons from more lateral part of dorsal VPM
(‘cores’ of barreloids), at certain levels of anesthe-
sia, are capable of conveying information from single
vibrissae (Urbain and Deschênes 2007). Thus, judging
from their anatomical locations, the two components
differentiated in our experiment would represent the
multi- and single-whisker pathways, correspondingly.
The fact that the cells from the principal trigeminal
nucleus giving off the axons of the barreloid ‘head’
pathway have larger somata than those of the ‘core’
pathway (Veinante and Deschênes 1999; Lo et al. 1999)
suggests that they may also conduct spikes with larger
speed which is in line with our ﬁndings that the ﬁrst
component, encompassing ‘heads’ of barreloids reaches
its maximum faster.

It is worth emphasizing that our method which aver-
ages the volleys of activity with speciﬁc spatiotemporal
characteristics is much more accurate in this respect
than analyzes based on single unit recordings, as the

6The single exception is Rat 6, where the recording grid encom-
passed the border with cortical tissue. For this rat we found three
strong cortical components with long latencies accompanied by
moderate strength components typically located at somatosen-
sory thalamus.

472

J Comput Neurosci (2010) 29:459–473

spiking of single neurons in anaesthetized preparation
is capricious and the required number of cells neces-
sarily leads to averaging data from many animals. In
contrast, our method allows for reliable analysis of data
from a single animal. For example, the results shown in
Fig. 6 quite well differentiate the two parallel volleys
traversing the thalamus with different time dynamics
and via different thalamic subregions. Obviously, one
would need a group of animals to identify all sources of
smaller amplitude.

Abbreviations

anterior pretectal nucleus

posterior thalamic nuclear group
reticular thalamic nucleus
substantia nigra

hippocampus
latero-dorsal thalamic nucleus
lateral posterior thalamic nucleus

APT
DLG dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus
Hipp
LD
LP
MGM medial geniculate nucleus, medial part
Po
Rt
SN
VPM ventral postero-medial thalamic nucleus
VLG ventral lateral geniculate nucleus
ZI
ZIc
cp
ic
ml
opt

zona incerta
caudal part of zona incerta
cerebral peduncle
internal capsule
medial lemniscus
optic tract

References

Bell, A. J., & Sejnowski, T. J. (1995). An information-
maximization approach to blind separation and blind decon-
volution. Neural Computation, 7(6), 1129–1159.

neuronal excitability and stimulus processing in the auditory
cortex. Journal of Neurophysiology, 94(3), 1904–1911.
Land, P. W., Buffer, S. A., & Yaskosky, J. D. (1995). Barreloids
in adult rat thalamus: Three-dimensional architecture and
relationship to somatosensory cortical barrels. The Journal
of Comparative Neurology, 355(4), 573–588.

Ł ˛eski, S., Wójcik, D. K., Tereszczuk, J.,

´Swiejkowski, D. A.,
Kublik, E., & Wróbel, A. (2007). Inverse Current-Source
Density method in 3D: Reconstruction ﬁdelity, boundary
effects, and inﬂuence of distant sources. Neuroinformatics,
5(4), 207–222.

Lin, B., Colgin, L. L., Brücher, F. A., Arai, A. C., &
Lynch, G. (2002). Interactions between recording technique
and AMPA receptor modulators. Brain Research, 955(1–2),
164–173.

Lipton, M. L., Fu, K. M. G., Branch, C. A., & Schroeder, C. E.
(2006). Ipsilateral hand input to area 3b revealed by con-
verging hemodynamic and electrophysiological analyses in
macaque monkeys. Journal of Neuroscience, 26(1), 180–185.
Lo, F. S., Guido, W., & Erzurumlu, R. S. (1999). Electro-
physiological properties and synaptic responses of cells in
the trigeminal principal sensory nucleus of postnatal rats.
Journal of Neurophysiology, 82(5), 2765–2775.

McKeown, M. J., Makeig, S., Brown, G. G., Jung, T.,
Kindermann, S. S., Bell, A. J., et al. (1998). Analysis of fMRI
data by blind separation into independent spatial compo-
nents. Human Brain Mapping, 6(3), 160–188.

Mitzdorf, U. (1985). Current source-density method and applica-
tion in cat cerebral cortex: Investigation of evoked potentials
and EEG phenomena. Physiological Reviews, 65(1), 37–100.
Nicholson, C., & Freeman, J. A. (1975). Theory of current source-
density analysis and determination of conductivity tensor
for anuran cerebellum. Journal of Neurophysiology, 38(2),
356–368.

Nicolelis, M. A., Chapin, J. K., & Lin, R. C. (1992). Somatotopic
maps within the zona incerta relay parallel gabaergic so-
matosensory pathways to the neocortex, superior colliculus,
and brainstem. Brain Research, 577(1), 134–141.

Novak, J. L., & Wheeler, B. C. (1989). Two-dimensional current
source density analysis of propagation delays for compo-
nents of epileptiform bursts in rat hippocampal slices. Brain
Research, 497(2), 223–230.

Nunez, P. L., & Srinivasan, R. (2005). Electric ﬁelds of the brain:
The neurophysics of EEG. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Paxinos, G., & Watson, C. (1996). The rat brain in stereotaxic
coordinates (Compact 3rd ed.). London: Academic Press.
Paxinos, G., & Watson, C. (2007). The rat brain in stereotaxic

Comon, P. (1994). Independent Component Analysis, a new

coordinates (6th ed.). London: Academic Press.

concept? Signal Processing, 36(3), 287–314.

de Solages, C., Szapiro, G., Brunel, N., Hakim, V., Isope, P.,
Buisseret, P., et al. (2008). High-frequency organization and
synchrony of activity in the Purkinje cell layer of the cerebel-
lum. Neuron, 58(5), 775–788.

Diamond, M. E., Armstrong-James, M., & Ebner, F. F. (1992).
Somatic sensory responses in the rostral sector of the pos-
terior group (pom) and in the ventral posterior medial nu-
cleus (vpm) of the rat thalamus. The Journal of Comparative
Neurology, 318(4), 462–476.

Freeman, J. A., & Nicholson, C. (1975). Experimental optimiza-
tion of current source-density technique for anuran cerebel-
lum. Journal of Neurophysiology, 38(2), 369–382.

Himberg, J., Hyvärinen, A., & Esposito, F. (2004). Validating
the independent components of neuroimaging time series via
clustering and visualization. Neuroimage, 22(3), 1214–1222.
Lakatos, P., Shah, A. S., Knuth, K. H., Ulbert, I., Karmos, G., &
Schroeder, C. E. (2005). An oscillatory hierarchy controlling

Pettersen, K. H., Devor, A., Ulbert, I., Dale, A. M., & Einevoll,
G. T. (2006). Current-source density estimation based on
inversion of electrostatic forward solution: Effects of ﬁnite
extent of neuronal activity and conductivity discontinuities.
Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 154(1–2), 116–133.

Pierret, T., Lavallée, P., & Deschênes, M. (2000). Parallel streams
for the relay of vibrissal information through thalamic bar-
reloids. Journal of Neuroscience, 20(19), 7455–7462.

Rajkai, C., Lakatos, P., Chen, C. M., Pincze, Z., Karmos, G., &
Schroeder, C. E. (2008). Transient cortical excitation at the
onset of visual ﬁxation. Cerebral Cortex, 18(1), 200–209.
Reidl, J., Starke, J., Omer, D. B., Grinvald, A., & Spors, H.
(2007). Independent component analysis of high-resolution
imaging data identiﬁes distinct functional domains. Neuro-
image, 34(1), 94–108.

Saleem, A. B., Krapp, H. G., & Schultz, S. R. (2008). Receptive
ﬁeld characterization by spike-triggered independent com-
ponent analysis. Journal of Vision, 8(13), 2.1–216.

J Comput Neurosci (2010) 29:459–473

473

Schiessl, I., Stetter, M., Mayhew, J. E., McLoughlin, N.,
Lund, J. S., & Obermayer, K. (2000). Blind signal separa-
tion from optical imaging recordings with extended spatial
decorrelation. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineer-
ing, 47(5), 573–577.

Schroeder, C. E., Tenke, C. E., & Givre, S. J. (1992) Subcortical
contributions to the surface-recorded ﬂash-vep in the awake
macaque. Electroencephalography and Clinical Neurophysi-
ology, 84(3), 219–231.

Shimono, K., Brucher, F., Granger, R., Lynch, G., & Taketani,
M. (2000) Origins and distribution of cholinergically induced
beta rhythms in hippocampal slices. Journal of Neuroscience,
20(22), 8462–8473.

Stoelzel, C. R., Bereshpolova, Y., & Swadlow, H. A. (2009).
Stability of thalamocortical synaptic transmission across
awake brain states. Journal of Neuroscience, 29(21), 6851–
6859.

Stone, J. V., & Porrill, J. (1999). Regularisation using spatiotem-
poral independence and predictability. Computational Neu-
roscience Report 201, Psychology Department, Shefﬁeld
University.

Stone J. V., Porrill J., Porter N. R., & Wilkinson I. D. (2002).
Spatiotemporal independent component analysis of event-
related fMRI data using skewed probability density func-
tions. Neuroimage, 15(2), 407–421.

Tanskanen, J. M. A., Mikkonen, J. E., & Penttonen, M. (2005).
Independent component analysis of neural populations from

multielectrode ﬁeld potential measurements. Journal of
Neuroscience Methods, 145(1–2), 213–232.

Tenke, C. E., Schroeder, C. E., Arezzo, J. C., & Vaughan, H. G.
(1993). Interpretation of high-resolution current source den-
sity proﬁles: A simulation of sublaminar contributions to the
visual evoked potential. Experimental Brain Research, 94(2),
183–192.

Urbain, N., & Deschênes, M. (2007). A new thalamic pathway
of vibrissal information modulated by the motor cortex.
Journal of Neuroscience, 27(45), 12407–12412.

Vaknin, G., DiScenna, P. G., & Teyler, T. J. (1988). A method
for calculating current source density (CSD) analysis without
resorting to recording sites outside the sampling volume.
Journal of Neuroscience Methods, 24(2), 131–135.

Veinante, P., & Deschênes, M. (1999). Single- and multi-whisker
channels in the ascending projections from the principal
trigeminal nucleus in the rat. Journal of Neuroscience,
19(12), 5085–5095.

Waite, P. (2004). Trigeminal sensory system. In G. Paxinos (Ed.),
The rat nervous system (pp. 817–851). Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Wójcik, D. K., & Ł ˛eski, S. (2009). Current source density re-
construction from incomplete data. Neural Computation.
doi:10.1162/neco.2009.07-08-831.

Ylinen, A., Bragin, A., Nádasdy, Z., Jandó, G., Szabó, I., Sik, A.,
et al. (1995). Sharp wave-associated high-frequency oscilla-
tion (200 hz) in the intact hippocampus: Network and intra-
cellular mechanisms. Journal of Neuroscience, 15(1), 30–46.

